# Menial Servants During the Period of the War

### MENIAL SERVANTS DURING THE PERIOD OF THE WAR

Visitors from oversea tell us of a new France and a new Britain, unsparingly cleared for action, war-weary but resolute and untiring; where invidious distinctions of class, sex, wealth, and privilege are giving way before the exigencies of a war that is to be fought to a finish; where all resources of material and man power are being thrown into a common stock of means for the prosecution of a joint enterprise whose demands overbear all questions of personal gain and immemorial usage.

A year has passed now since America entered on full partnership in this joint enterprise. During this time, and the period leading up to it, the

Americans have contributed much. They have undertaken a burden of debt, and they have begun to send their young men into the field. At the same time they have also begun to redistribute the industrial forces of the country to meet the material demands of the Great War, and to place these war demands ahead of in any other things. In a measure, it is coming to be realised that the war is a joint enterprise; but it is only in words that this realisation has gone so far as to recognise that the nation's resources are therefore to be managed as a common stock, devoted to one paramount end. There is much edifying talk on this theme, and there has been an abundance of moral suasion designed to induce a spirit of sacrifice for the common good. But of resolute action and a concerted move toward accomplishing something of this kind there has hitherto been surprisingly little. The dominant note still is respect of persons and of those invidious amenities that distinguish peace from a state of war. There still prevails a stubborn reluctance to take such concrete measures as will in any degree derange the settled scheme of things as it runs in time of peace.

Meantime it is becoming increasingly evident that the Great War is to be

America's war in the end, if it is to be brought to such a conclusion as the Americans will tolerate. It has already become America's part to supply the food and other means of its carrying on, and before the conclusion comes in sight it will also be America's part to supply the fighting men whose force will bring the decision. Yet it visibly continues to be the chief abiding concern of the Americans to avoid all derangement of the nugatory interests and usages of peace. Popular interest and administrative policy are still bent on the maintenance of the domestic status quo - the status of competitive gain and competitive spending.

The continued production and profitable sale of superfluities must not be materially curtailed; nor must any pressure of a less genial kind than well-bred advice and admonition be brought to bear on that voluminous scheme of competitive waste in which these superfluities are consumed. Only in respect of certain staple articles of food, and less freely in the use of fuel, have the exigencies of the common good been allowed to impose restrictions on the wasteful use of the means in hand; and then only tentatively. Many vested interests, enterprises of private gain, are engaged in the production and sale of these superfluities; and these vested interests still effectually claim the right of way as against an unreserved prosecution of the war. So there are also vested interests in the untrammeled consumption of superfluities by persons whose craving for social prestige can be gratified only by a conspicuous waste of goods and man power; and this right of untrammeled waste, too, is still upheld as being a good and righteous exercise of personal liberty in the face of the nation's war need.

In the production and competitive sale of superfluities, as well as in their decent consumption, a very large aggregate of labor is employed; at the same time that labor power is urgently needed for productive use in industries necessary to the prosecution of the war. It would be hazardous to offer an estimate of the total volume of labor which is so devoted to deliberate waste, but no man doubts that the total is very large. Not all of this wasted labor force is suitable for use in the war industries. And yet there is little of it that cannot be used to good effect; partly by direct participation in useful industry, partly by substitution to displace other workmen who are fit for useful work.

This wasted labor falls under two heads: (a) Employees engaged in the production and sale of superfluities, and (b) those employed in the wasteful consumption of superfluities, including the conspicuous waste of time and effort by caretakers and attendants in many domestic and public establishments.

Typical of the latter class are the many persons to be counted as domestic or "menial servants." Not all of the menials are to be counted in as items of conspicuous waste, without abatement; but it is not to be overlooked that such is ordinarily the nature of their service, with such slight abatement as may be reasonably allowed in any given case.

To appreciate the measure in which menial servants are actually dispensable in the life of the average American household, even in time of peace, it may be called to mind that the ordinary American household gets along without hired domestics; that these domestics themselves ordinarily get along without the use of servants to minister to their own personal wants; and that the number of households which employ domestics is smaller than the number of domestics employed - which leaves the common sort of

Americans unprovided with menial servants. "Servant" implies "Master," of course; and the average person, the common man, is not of the master class.

Now, in time of stress, when it has become expedient to throw all available resources into a common stock and to forego personal amenities for the common good, it is evident that the lot of the common man must be the lot to which all are called on to submit - for the period of the war.

The chief use of menial servants is to put in evidence their employer's ability to pay. This invidious use of their services commonly masquerades under the profession that they minister to the creature comfort of their masters. But it is plainly the spiritual comfort, the sense of self- complacency and invidious distinction, that is catered to by this class of service, rather than the physical well-being of the employers. It is the "better classes" that employ menial servants - better in point of social prestige. Servants have a "prestige value," as the economists would call it. This prestige value, which represents the "output" of such work, is a matter of invidious distinction. It is altogether of the nature of a spiritual or intangible product; something in the way of a pleasurable state of mind on the part of the employer; an article of "psychic income."

Evidently such psychic income, invidious distinction, prestige value, intangible goods, or whatever term may best cover the output of the menial servant's work, is of very little if any use in the prosecution of the war.

In effect, these intangible goods are as sand in the bearings of the great industrial and military mechanism by which the war is to be won. Yet it will be found that many, if not substantially all, of those better classes who profess an unbounded patriotic devotion to the democratic cause for which the war is fought, still continue to draw on the country's labor force for menial service with which to keep themselves in countenance as licensed wasters with ability to pay.

The fortunes of war turn finally on the use of the nation's man power, in productive industry and under arms. Of material resources there is no lack, but of available labor power there is a visible shortage which is bound to grow more serious as time passes and the work to be taken care of increases, at the same time that the drain on the country's man power goes on at a constantly accelerated rate, due to the military and industrial - demands of the forces under arms. All the while there is in the background this body of labor force devoted to menial service and the psychic income of the better classes; a body of labor force kept substantially idle, so far as regards any productive work.

So the question presents itself: How can the energies of this large body of idle man-power be turned to account - diverted from this wasteful consumption of superfluities to productive work? It has been suggested, or tentatively hinted, that conscription of this idle labor, simple and direct, might be resorted to with good effect. But such a degree of odium attaches to all manner of coercion, in the mind of the Americans, that conscription could presumably not be put into effect until the case had become inordinately urgent; that is to say, until too late. At the same time conscription in such a case would have to contend with many complications and would be disproportionately costly, in that it would involve an extensive bureaucratic machinery organised for the purpose.

In analogous cases of perplexity the usual expedient has been some ingenious recourse to taxation, which will avoid the formal appearance of coercion at the same time that it is counted on to bring the requisite pressure to bear where it will bring results. This sentimental aversion to coercive measures of all kinds will not apply to a prudently formulated tax, in anything like the same degree; but any tax that is to escape condemnation on this score must be so laid as not to offend the requirement of a formal impartiality. It is in great part a question of the letter of the law rather than of its ulterior purpose.

This idle man-power embodied in the servant class is sorely needed for present use in productive industry, and to that end it should be practicable to lay a steeply progressive tax on those shameless persons who still go on employing a staff of unproductive domestics to uphold their own personal prestige in the face of the nation's sorest need. There will, e.g., be two able-bodied man servants, coachman and footman, in waiting at the curb while their patriotic and spendthrift mistress within the gates sits in self-appointed council on the state of the republic at large with a quorum of ladies as scrupulously ignorant as herself in all those things that have any slightest significance for the work in hand. Indeed, merit is still to be acquired in that way.

As a measure of expediency, for the period of the war, therefore, the suggestion is here offered, tentatively and as a point of departure, that a progressive capitation tax be laid on menial servants, payable by their employers, rising step by step with every additional servant employed in any one household. So it is proposed that any one household of five persons or more be allowed one servant tax-free, provided that such household includes as many as two children under five years of age. It is, of course, to be recognised that the exemption so provided for concedes something to the class of households which habitually employ servants, and that the law would at this point admit a mitigation of the rule which says that in time of stress the common lot must be the lot of all concerned. The suggestion has also been made that the like exemption should apply in the case of households which include one or more invalids requiring personal service; but it is said by those that should know that all such can be more adequately and economically cared for in public hospitals and infirmaries, under the care of properly trained nurses; and for the period of the war some slight home comforts forgone may fairly be overlooked even by well- bred invalids, if their creature comforts are not neglected. It is otherwise as regards households which are made up of bread-winners alone, or whose adult members are to be classed as such. In such cases it would seem reasonable to let the rule of exemption apply. It is true, the common run of households in this country do not, in ordinary times, employ servants to the extent so provided for, under the like circumstances of bread-winning and child-rearing; but it is believed that the common-sense of the community would allow this much of a concession to the established usage, according to which those who are able to pay have habitually employed servants in the past. It is a concession to usage, and it may be a debatable point.

Beginning with the lowest-paid servants in households not exempt under this concession, or with the second lowest in households entitled to the exemption, it is proposed to impose a tax equal to one hundred percent of the wages paid such servants, or their wages and keep in case the servants' keep is included in the terms of employment. Beyond this, the second taxable domestic would be taxed at the rate of two hundred percent on his cost, the third at three hundred percent, etc.; each successive step in the series going to the next higher-paid employee, and the rate increasing by one hundred percent of the employee's wages at each successive step.

The effect of such a tax should be two-fold: it should set free an appreciable number of persons for use in productive occupations; and it should yield an appreciable revenue. It will be remarked that such a tax will bring no coercive pressure on those who can afford to employ servants, particularly not on those who are accustomed to keep a considerable number of domestics; yet it is fairly to be presumed that such taxation will induce many householders to forgo the use of menial servants, or at least to release a reasonable proportion of the number habitually employed. At the same time it is reasonably to be expected that those persons who still feel constrained by their craving for prestige or for personal comfort to employ a staff of menial servants will be favorably inclined to contribute in due proportion to the funds necessary for the prosecution of the war, and that they will therefore not find the alternative offered them between the payment of the tax and the release of their unproductive servants at all an onerous choice. Indeed, in view of the present and increasing need of workmen in the essential industries, the alternative so offered between the release of unproductive servants and the payment of the proposed tax is to be rated as a concession to the prejudices of those classes who are able to pay.

As has been indicated above, the proposal as it stands is to be regarded only as a point of departure for the contemplated plan to release idle servants by taxation. It is to be taken as a basis on which to deal with other classes of employment and of employees whose services are of the same general nature and supplement or take the place of domestic service in one way and another. So, e.g., it is obvious that the employees of hotels, clubs, theaters, railway stations, sleeping and parlor cars, and an indefinite number of analogous establishments, will have to be drawn in under the same plan, in some degree and in one way and another. It is also an open question how far business concerns engaged in the production and sale of superfluities are to be laid under contribution, in men and money, under the same general plan.

Evidently the production of those superfluities, for the decent consumption of which the menial servants are employed and paid for, is quite as readily dispensable as the decent consumption of the superfluities produced for this purpose; and evidently there is, in point of principle, no defensible ground for the exemption of such business establishments and their employees. They serve the same purpose - conspicuous waste with a view to social prestige - and they are equally disserviceable for the prosecution of the war. There is the difficulty, of course, that many of these establishments produce or deal in goods or services that are of material use, often of necessary use; even when the goods in question have chiefly a prestige value as, e.g., tailors and other producers and sellers of apparel for men, women, and children; department stores of the fashionable sort, or even the unfashionable ones; places of public entertainment, and public vehicles for hire; laundries and bakeshops, etc. But there is also on the other hand the difficulty that in case the proposed measure should lead to an appreciable release of domestics, these establishments so engaged in what may be called personal service would be called on to fill their place in some measure by "out-service"; hence it will become imperative to reach these domestic-service concerns at large, since the domestics whose release is aimed at might otherwise be expected to shift into the employ of these "out-service" concerns, and so continue their work as hired consumers under another style and title, thereby and in so far defeating the intent of the measure. These and the like difficulties will, of course, have to be provided for.

It is also a matter of course that there are many and various objections and exceptions readily to be found by those who may be interested in finding them. E.g., it will be - indeed it has been - said that a large and elaborate house such as commonly requires a retinue of menials for its upkeep and advantageous exhibition, could not advantageously be inhabited, or even kept in running order, without the customary "help." To which is fairly to be replied that such a house is in so far, and for the period of the war, to be classed among the superfluities; that its maintenance and due exhibition in no way conduce to the prosecution of the war; and that the common sort on whom chiefly falls the burden of the war have not the use of houses requiring a retinue of menials even in times of peace. There is also the further consideration that superfluously large houses of this kind, which would in this way be left partly vacant, might so become available for effectual use as habitations by workmen employed in productive work. Some measure should logically be taken to turn such superfluous habitations to account to meet the demands of housing, particularly in the cities and industrial centers. At the same time, country houses that are similarly threatened with decay for want of cheap domestics might reasonably be taken over as recreation grounds for workmen, and more particularly for their women and children, during the period of the war. There is also an ever-increasing need of barracks, billets, hospitals, and infirmaries, which may in part be met by the use of such houses otherwise lying waste. The houses so turned to a baser use, for the period of the war, would presumably not escape some slight defacement in their decorative fittings and some enhanced wear and tear at the hands of underbred tenants; but all that should go in easily and unobtrusively as a willing sacrifice from the side of their owners, for the period of the war.

Again, it is said, with some truth and with more of its counterfeit, that the persons hereby released from domestic service would find themselves homeless, friendless, and useless in an industrial world in which all their previous training would go for naught, resulting in widespread privation and a perplexing problem of unemployment. But it is to be remarked that the community would still save something by the move, even in the wholly improbable case that all these released menials were to fall into the class of the unemployed; since, although the community at large would in that case have to charge itself with their keep, they will at the worst no longer be wasting material resources in the production of superfluities which require their combined efforts to consume. It is also to be noted that, while many of them have been trained into effectual incompetency for useful work, yet it does not follow that even these cannot be made use of - boys from the farms and villages are trained into serviceable soldiers in the course of weeks and many of them are even made into creditable aviators in a few months. Many will find their place in occupations of much the same kind that they are used to, in the service of the public or of establishments serving the public use; possibly displacing others who are better fit for use in the essential industries; and a large number will fall into place in work for which their training has prepared them. There is no lack of work of the kind demanded of chambermaids and cooks, and footmen and butlers are, typically, an eminently able-bodied sort, who will readily qualify as stevedores and freight handlers so soon as the day's work has somewhat hardened their muscles and reduced their bulk; whereas chauffeurs, mechanicians, plumbers, house-carpenters, electricians, janitors, gardeners, are already urgently in demand for work that is waiting to be done.

This does not by any means exhaust the range of objections to be looked for, but it will be seen that all these and such-like objections are of the nature of underbrush - convenient to hide in for any persons to whom the project is distasteful. They do not touch the substantial merits of the plan, as a measure of present expediency. In effect, they only serve to call attention to minor difficulties in its execution. A more substantial obstacle is likely to be encountered in the known reluctance of any law- giving body to enact a law which might be presumed, incidentally and for the period of the war, to equalise the conditions of life as between the servant keeping class from which the law-givers are drawn and the common man to whose class the released domestics would bring an increment of numbers and discontent.
