# Farm Labor for the Period of the War

I

II

III

IV

## I

### I

The Great War has thrown an unexampled strain on this country's labor force. All industrial undertakings are suffering from the drain on their labor supply, and from the disturbance which always comes on with such a shortage and redistribution of labor. The farm industry of the grain states has its share in this hardship along with the rest. But there is the difference that grain growing is, just now, a primary requirement, indispensable, beyond any other branch of industry. The fortunes of the

Great War visibly turn on the American grain-grower's ability to feed the fighting nations. If the American grain supply falls below the minimum necessary to keep America's allies in fighting trim, then the victory will go to the German Empire with all that it may involve. If a reasonable sufficiency of American grain continues to be delivered in Europe as required, then the German Empire will go down to irretrievable defeat; and it will presumably be taken off the map by agreement between democratic

Europe and the farmers and workmen of America.

By a combination of circumstances, unexampled and largely unforeseen, the chances of success or failure have come to depend immediately on the supply of shipping and of foodstuffs; and by force of the same circumstances

America's part in the supply of both has been thrown into the foreground, as indispensable to the successful prosecution of the war. Of the two the increase of shipping is the more immediately urgent; but it is also the part which can effectually be pushed to a working sufficiency by concerted efforts. The need of shipping can be met in some tolerable measure by drawing on the available materials and consistently pushing the work in hand; and, indeed, it appears that the measures required to this end have at last been taken and are bringing the required output.

The production of foodstuffs is a somewhat different matter. It depends on the seasons, and the rate of production cannot be speeded up beyond the rate at which the seasons revolve. So that it becomes a question of how large a volume of output can be turned out within the run of the season and by use of the resources that are already employed. In effect, a limit has already been set to this Year's production; a limit which may be approximated, but not passed. There may be some slight qualification to be made in this broad statement, but it will have to be allowed to stand as substantially correct. No appreciable increase of acreage or soil fertility is to be looked for, and there can be no substantial change in the methods of cultivating and handling the crops. And it is to be noted that in

American farming the production of other foodstuffs than the grain crops depends, on the whole and with slight exceptions, on the yield of the grain crops.

In the last resort American farming is primarily grain-farming; from which it follows that the American production of foodstuffs rests in the main on the grain-crops of the Middle West; which in turn centers in the grain- growing prairie states. So that, by a singular turn of events, the prosecution of the Great War has come to depend on the season's production in the prairie states, more immediately and more critically than on any other one factor. And as the situation now stands, with the crops committed to the soil and the weather, substantially all that can be done by taking thought is to take care that there will be a sufficient labor force of the right kind to take care of the crops and to see that nothing goes to waste out of what the season brings forth.

It has been said that there is no scarcity of foodstuffs to be looked for during the coming crop year; that the prospective harvest, according to the most reliable estimates, promises to be sufficient to meet all the needs of the Americans and their allies throughout the coming year, with reasonable economy. But this appraisal of the situation appears to take account of present rather than prospective needs. It overlooks the fact that the needs both of the Americans and o f their allies are bound to be greater during the coming year than ever before; due to a larger consumption by the forces in the field and by those auxiliary forces of man power whose work is indispensable to the support of the forces immediately engaged in military operations - larger by a very considerable amount than the necessary consumption of the same persons would be at home and under the ordinary conditions of the day's work. It also overlooks the added cost of transportation - as counted in terms of consumption - involved in feeding the same number of persons at a distance. It would be a safe underestimate of the case to say that every addition of one man to the nation's fighting forces draws at least two men from the home occupations of the country; and it may also safely be said that the need of foodstuffs for the support of the men under arms will be twice as large, man for man, as the necessary consumption of the same men at home under ordinary conditions.

Meanwhile the supply of farm labor is subject to a steady drain - directly by men enlisting or being drafted into the army or navy, whether from the farms or from the sources from which farm-hands are habitually procured, and indirectly by the like demands of the other industries necessary to the prosecution of the war. This flow of labor from the farms and the farming states is nothing sudden or spectacular, but it is unceasing and it is forever on the increase. Every increase of the American forces in the field, and every extension of the war industries, brings an additional drain on the available labor supply; and the grain states are subject to this drain as much or more than any other section of the country's industry.

It has been said, or rather it has been shrewdly argued in certain quarters, that there is actually no embarrassing shortage of labor in the grain states today. It is argued that what is spoken of as a shortage of labor is in reality only a faulty distribution of the available supply, and that this can easily be remedied by such measures of publicity and management as will place the idle workmen where they are needed for work to be done. There is doubtless a modicum of truth in this contention, but it does not go far to correct the known difficulties which now face the farm situation in the grain states. It would perhaps not do to say that, in effect, it amounts to prevarication so far as concerns the question of farm-hands in the grain states, but it is also difficult to avoid the impression that this contention is put forward by interested parties speaking in behalf of a certain vested interest among the labor organisations.

But whatever may be the state of the case in this respect today, the labor supply is constantly dwindling and the need is growing. The demand for foodstuffs, and particularly for grain, is increasing and is bound to go on increasing. And it is time to look ahead, for the Great War is not yet finished. The reason why the war is not yet finished is, very simply, that the American people have not yet gone to work to finish it. They have not yet been willing effectually to make the war a joint enterprise and to go to work in a joint effort, at the cost of such a disturbance of private interests as will unavoidably be involved in bringing the war to a conclusion of a kind that the Americans will tolerate. The American people have failed to bear their part in the conduct of the war, not because they are unwilling or unable to bear the burden, but because they have been unable to make up their mind to disturb the vested interests that stand in the way of any effectual joint effort. The vested interests are stubbornly unwilling to submit to any measures that will leave them insecure or that will disturb the traffic from which they derive their income; and among these vested interests are to be counted certain corporate organisations of labor, as well as the business concerns with whom the labor organisations habitually deal. And yet it is sufficiently evident to any disinterested observer that if the war is to be won it will have to be at the cost of such derangement of the vested interests, whether of labor or of capital, as may be involved in any unreserved joint use of all available resources, including the nation's man power wherever it is to be found and regardless of private interests that may stand in the way.

As a working force, as a going concern engaged in the prosecution of the war for democracy, the American people is made up of the American farmers and the American workmen. The vested interests are sections and fractions of the community who are vested with something in the way of a customary claim to a preferred share in the community's joint product. Experience teaches that such a vested preference will be surrendered only under pressure of necessity, only when its retention involves palpable risk of its total loss. The work now in hand is work for the American farmers and workmen. The destiny of this nation, and of the other democratic nations as well, rests on the work of these two; and it all resolves itself finally into a question of teamwork between these two free constituents of the

American people. What the vested interests will do toward that end is, by and large, a question of what they will be compelled to put up with at the hands of the farmers and workmen.

Meantime, the beginning of wisdom in the prosecution of the war is the growing of grain; and the next grave consideration is the provision of shipping. Both of these call for work and for a labor force to do the work; and, indeed, both of them call for skilled labor, each after its kind. The great and final need in any of the great industries is always skilled labor; and grain-farming is no exception to the rule. Among those persons who know anything about the matter it is well known that any untrained city-bred man who is taken on as a farm-hand is not worth his keep during his first year on the farm; and he will have to be quite exceptional - as, e.g., a trained machinist or teamster - if he is to be worth much more than his keep during his second year. The call of the farm is for skilled labor - skilled and specialised. Any capable farm-hand is a trained workman. He must, in effect, have had several years of special training, such as will amount to an apprenticeship of several years' duration.

This special training is not to be acquired suddenly, by attending a suitable night school; but it is also not lost suddenly or altogether by those farm-hands and farm boys who have shifted into other occupations. One such farm-bred workman who is now employed in some other occupation is worth an indefinite number of equally stout and equally intelligent men who have never had the benefit of farm training. The like rule applies with nearly equal force to newcomers from the agricultural countries of Europe and Asia, where the extensive methods of American prairie farming are not in use. These Europeans and Asiatics - Greeks, Sicilians, Portuguese,

Dutch, Lowland Chinese - are capital farmers in their own way; but they are not competent to produce wheat, corn, barley, rye, milk, butter, pork, under the conditions offered by the American prairie states. Here they would be rated as "newcomers," and there would be a doubt as to whether they are worth their keep.

To any one who is familiar with the great grain states and the many country towns scattered over the prairie region, it is evident that these country towns contain a supply of labor suitable for use on the neighboring farms; either immediately or with a short allowance of time to get them back into form. These American country towns consist mainly of retail concerns of many kinds, and retail professional men who help take care of the interests of the retail concerns that make up the town. The retail concerns are very numerous and of many kinds, engaged in buying farm products and forwarding them to the central markets or in selling and distributing all kinds of necessary supplies to the farm population, together with any superfluities which they may be able to induce the farm population to buy.

## II

### II

The country town is an organisation of business concerns engaged in buying things from the farmers in order to sell at an advance to the central markets, and in buying things from the central markets in order to sell at an advance to the farmers. The country town is an organisation of "middlemen," and it is out of this difference between the buying price and the selling price that the entire town gets its living, together with whatever its inhabitants are able to lay up. The rest of the town depends on the traffic of its business men who buy and sell and make a profit in buying and selling.

The variety of these retail business concerns is very considerable. Not including professional men, such as lawyers and clergymen, who get a living indirectly out of the general traffic, the list will run something as follows: groceries, drygoods, notions, boots and shoes, clothing, millinery, hardware, laundry, livery, harness, vehicles, jewelry, implements and machinery, grain buyers, stock buyers, express and transfer companies, banks, drugs, lumber, coal, bakeries, meat markets, dairies, hotels and boarding houses, cigar stores, candy kitchens, furniture, seed and feed stores. For any ordinary country town of, say, ten thousand inhabitants, this would not be a complete list; but it includes the greater number of those special business pursuits that are considered indispensable to the traffic of buying and selling, and necessary to the comfort of the town's inhabitants.

There is always more or less duplication among these retail concerns - more or less, but usually a great deal. In such lines as groceries, coal, drygoods, banks, drugs, e.g., the number of concerns actually engaged will sometimes run as high as ten or twenty times the number required to take care of the traffic; and in these lines it seldom amounts to less than four or five times the number needed. A prairie town, county seat, of ten or twelve thousand will be found to support forty groceries, twelve coal yards, seven lumber yards, nine drug stores, ten banks, six hardware stores, an indefinite number of stock buyers, lawyers, real estate and insurance agents, clergymen and detachable politicians, who pick up a livelihood out of the screenings. In some lines the duplication, and the consequent waste of work, may be relatively slight, as, e.g., in express companies, meat markets, or laundries, which are likely to be local agencies of larger concerns located at some larger center.

Indeed, the extent of this duplication of retail establishments varies a good deal, not only from one trade to another, but also from place to place. There appears, on the whole, to be more extensive duplication among retail concerns in the older settled parts of the prairie states, and perhaps more toward the south than toward the north. As near as a general statement can be made to apply to the grain states - the corn belt and the wheat region - it would perhaps do to say that this class of wasteful duplication will foot up to about three fourths of all the equipment and workmen employed. It might appear on closer examination that this estimate is too high; that the wasteful use of men and equipment due to an excessive number of retail concerns in the country towns will not run as high as seventy-five percent of the total; but any deliberate survey of the known facts cannot well avoid placing the estimate of such waste nearer three fourths than one half.

It is also true that the returns on investment in this retail trade will not ordinarily be found to run excessively high, as things commonly go. The rate of profits appears to vary widely, all the way from an extremely high percentage - over one hundred percent in some instances - to a vanishing point among the less fortunate concerns, who will sometimes be found doing business at a loss, and who then presently end in insolvency. On an average the returns on investment may be quite "reasonable"; but the number of concerns among which these "reasonable returns" are divided is much larger than is necessary to take care of the trade in the most economical manner.

"Reasonable returns" on something more than twice the investment for which there is any use in the trade will foot up to something over twice the "reasonable" total return that should "reasonably" go to the retailers for doing this work of marketing and distribution in a sane and economical way.

It may also be noted by the way that an appreciable proportion of this retail trade in the country towns is appreciably worse than useless, so far as it has any bearing on the net productive efficiency of the farm community that is served by the trade of the towns. A multiplicity of competing fashion shops, e.g., or of tombstone shops, or furniture stores, serves no better purpose than the encouragement of wasteful expenditure on goods which add to the discomforts of life at the cost of its efficiency.

It is true, in ordinary times of peace, when the citizens of any well- conducted democracy are presumed to owe no active duty to the country in which they live - in ordinary times no thoughtful person would be inclined to check up or find fault with habitual waste of this kind that conduces to nothing better than the. spread of fashionable discomfort. In time of peace, it is commonly admitted that any citizen who has reached years of discretion should be free to follow his natural bent into all the dips, spurs, and angles of human folly; but in a time of extraordinary stress, when the common good is at stake, when no wasteful use of resources or man power is to be tolerated, this pursuit of "business as usual" in the production of waste and inefficiency takes on another color and becomes a matter of legitimate public concern.

A very considerable proportion of the retail trade in the country towns, as well as in the cities, is taken up with, and gets its profits from, the production and spread of waste, discomfort, and inefficiency, in the name of fashion and respectability. It would not be easy to come to an understanding as to just how much of this retail traffic is occupied chiefly or wholly with supplying the means of fashionable waste and respectable discomfort. In most lines of the trade it is a question of more or less; some trades being devoted almost wholly to useless expenditures, others only in part; but when all due allowance has been made, it will always be found that it foots up to a very considerable amount of the total traffic. Perhaps a fair statistical estimate would run about as follows:

Taking one retail concern with another, one third of this retail trade is to be written off as being productive of nothing but waste; which leaves two thirds of the whole to be counted in as being of some use; and of this remaining two thirds, again, an amount running between one half and three fourths- say two thirds - is further to be written off as being mere wasteful duplication of equipment and work among the concerns that are doing partly useful work.

Now, two thirds times two thirds equals four ninths - the amount to be allowed for useless duplication of equipment and working force in that part of the retail trade which serves in part a useful purpose; which is to be added to the one third of the whole that is already accounted for as pure waste; and which so brings the estimated total of useless work and equipment in the retail trade to seven ninths of the whole. Something like seven ninths of all that goes into the retail trade, in the way of stock, equipment, and working force, is accordingly to be set down to the account of useless waste and duplication. It therefore appears, on this showing, that something like two ninths of the number of concerns and of the workmen employed by them are sufficient to take care of all the useful work which the retail merchants of the country towns have to do.

The upshot of this computation is that the country retail trade can afford to set loose something like seven ninths of the working force which it now employs, without interfering with the useful work of marketing farm products and distributing useful goods to the farmers. A closer scrutiny of the whole matter would presumably lead to a more extreme conclusion, since much of the retail trade as now conducted serves the town population; and since this town population is itself for the most part to be regarded as supernumerary, for all material purposes; inasmuch as this town population is either occupied in the retail trade or dependent on the trade for a livelihood.

Something like seven ninths of the town population, perhaps, is to be counted as supernumeraries who contribute nothing to the net productive efficiency of the community from which they derive their livelihood. So much of the retail traffic, therefore, as serves the needs of this supernumerary town population is also to be counted out as being useless.

The work of marketing farm products and distributing goods to the farm population is useful and necessary, of course. Some of the work that is now done is needed; say one fifth is needed, according to the estimate and computation. But it is plainly not useful and necessary that an ordinary county seat in the prairie states should have thirty to forty groceries, each with full stock, equipment, and working force, when three or four groceries would do the necessary work better and with less waste all around. Nor is it useful and necessary that such a country town should have ten banks and seven or eight grain buyers, and a still larger number of regular stock buyers, together with a small swarm of speculative buyers who dip into the business when they see a chance. One buyer could take care of the traffic just as well; and the one local post office - which is not ordinarily duplicated - could take care of the necessary banking operations more expeditiously and at a very greatly lower cost.

The objection is ready, of course, that "the benefits of competition would be lost." But any one who knows anything about the country towns of the prairie states knows that the established retailers of the place habitually act in collusion in all matters which seriously interest them, such as prices and competition. The usual organ of this collusion, or of the conspiracy to restrain competition, is the local Commercial Club; and back of the Commercial Club, and serving its purposes, is the town government, which is much the same thing under another name; very much after the same fashion as the municipal government of the larger cities in the prairie states is commonly a creature of the Chamber of Commerce and represents the larger vested interests of the place.

Now, all this arrangement of Commercial Clubs and Chambers of Commerce, and of municipal governments acting as executive committees of these Clubs and Chambers, and taking care of the vested interests back of them-all this may be well enough in ordinary times when there is nothing at stake, beyond the creature comforts of the farming community. That is to say, it is all well enough if the American people - the American farmers and workmen - like to see things done in that way. But just now the life of this American people the American farmers and workmen - is at stake; their life, their fortunes, and their sacred honor. If America is to make good and win the Great War, all available resources - raw material, equipment, and man power - will have to be placed at the disposal of the American Federal Administration, without reservation and without any foxy intrigue looking to a surreptitious gain for the vested interests. It is time to quit being squeamish about the vested right of the country-town merchants and speculators to get a "reasonable return" on capital sunk in waste and duplication.

Of course, it is to be admitted without argument or hesitation that these country-town merchants, bankers, and buyers are by law and custom entitled to all the profits which they can get, and as long as they can get them.

The law has always said so. These are substantial citizens, pillars of society in a small way, and honorable gentlemen after their kind. And it appears also that according to law and custom the country-town merchants and speculators are within their ancient rights in organising a Commercial Club to take care of their joint interests, to regulate prices and profits, to exclude outside competitors, "and for other purposes." All this maneuvering for private gain and special advantages may be well enough in time of peace. It is the time-honored customary right of the townsman to turn an honest penny at the cost of the countrymen, and no thoughtful person would aim to disturb this vested right of the townsmen in ordinary times of peace. But it is today no longer a question of a sportsmanlike regard for vested rights and legal punctilios. It is a very concrete question of how to set free a force of workmen for use on the farms in the grain states; a labor force which is at present employed by the merchants of the country towns in a wasteful duplication of work, just to enable an excessive number of middlemen to turn an excessive number of honest pennies - more or less honest. Just now, in an extreme emergency, will the grain farmers of the prairie states continue to put up with this endless waste and duplication of work in their country towns? The immediate consequence of letting things drift as they have been doing will be to leave the grain farmers shorthanded on work which has to be done, on pain of national defeat in case of failure.

Most of the men employed in the retail trade of the country towns have in their time been drawn from the farms, after having learned more or less of farm work. The like is true for that great volume of subsidiary employments in the towns, which serve the local trades at the second remove. The greater proportion of these town workmen are fit to do farm work without having to relearn the trade. In fact, they constitute the one great and sufficient reserve of practical farm-hands which the country has to fall back on in the present emergency. So that the practical question is how to turn this force of trained workmen in the country towns to account for the growing of grain and meat, and the prosecution of the war turns visibly on the effectual solution of that problem.

Among those time-tried statesmen who are too wise to attempt anything effectual, the suggestion is very kindly entertained that moral suasion should be brought to play upon the sensibilities of these substantial citizens in the country towns, who are now conducting ten banks and forty grocery stores in a town that has use for only one of each. Circumstantial evidence appears to indicate that this recourse to moral suasion alone has been shrewdly suggested by the Commercial Clubs - the spokesmen of "business as usual." Moral suasion is a potent and valuable factor in human life, no doubt, but experience teaches that its best effects are likely to be slight and transient where it runs counter to a settled legal right. The farmers of this country, and the workmen, too, have in fact quit trusting their interests and ideals to the care of moral suasion in all those matters in which they come in conflict with the vested interests.

When a radical change of policy has become imperative, as in the present juncture, over-ripe statesmen will always endeavor to remedy things without altering them. That is the earmark of over-ripe statecraft, but it is not the way that is taken by the course of events.

## III

### III

To set free this labor supply which is now employed in useless duplication of work in the towns, it will be necessary to derange the business traffic of the country towns to some extent. No considerable number of employees can be set loose without shutting down some of the retail establishments now engaged in the business; and the larger the number of establishments which are induced to close down, the larger will be the number of workmen that will become available for use on the farms. The obvious line to take is to reduce the margin of profits in this retail trade to such a figure as to make it unprofitable for the full number of establishments to continue in the business. This can be done by administrative regulation and interference, such as will reduce the total margin of profits derived from the traffic. If the total profits can be reduced to such a figure as to afford reasonable returns only for a greatly reduced number of retail concerns, then the difficulty will have been overcome to that extent. All this will bring hardship on those who are affected by it, by driving them out of a useless line of enterprise into some useful work, but it should seem that the emergency will justify such a measure even at the cost of some degree of hardship to one and another, for the period of the war.

The whole case is simplest on the side of the local buyers - buyers of grain, hogs, cattle, and produce, who forward to the central markets, either through commission houses or otherwise. These buyers are comparatively few, as contrasted with the retail sellers, and the commodities which they handle are of few kinds and can be standardised and handled under inspector's tests. So true is this, and so serious and persistent have been the evasive maneuvers of these buyers, that government regulation by means of inspection, standard grades, and tests has already come to be the rule in this field. At the same time the farmers who have to deal with them are already thoroughly distrustful of these local buyers, and are ready to put up with any measures of regulation that promise to abate the irregularities and evasion of which the buyers are believed to be guilty. Indeed, a very strict and comprehensive regulation of this part of the country-town business under Federal authority would be welcomed by the farming community.

It is to be noted by the way that the regulation of local markets and their buyers has hitherto commonly been entrusted to the state authorities, and there has been much dissatisfaction with the way in which the state regulation has worked; there are many complaints that it has been inefficient and unreliable. It is believed that the state authorities are commonly dependent on the goodwill of the Commercial Clubs and Chambers of Commerce for their continued tenure of office; and the Commercial Clubs and the Chambers of Commerce are believed to guard the special business interests of their respective towns, with small regard for the needs and interests of the farm community from which they draw their livelihood. The farmers of the grain states have been learning not to look for an impartial regulation of markets and standards at the hands of any state administration, the roots of whose political tenure run down through the local political organisation to the same persons who make up the Commercial Clubs and the Chambers of Commerce. The established political machinery on which the government of state, county, and town finally rests will commonly be found to be made up of, or owe allegiance to, the same persons who make up these commercial bodies; and these commercial bodies are organised to take care of the vested business interests of the place. Such is the farmers' view of that matter, and so sure are the farmers of the iniquity of this arrangement that they are now organising with all speed to take their case past the established state and local authorities and take over the control under Federal auspices.

From which it follows that if there is to be anything like an unbiased regulation of the marketing of farm produce in the prairie states - or anything which the farmers will believe to be passably unbiased - the whole matter will have to be taken beyond the state authorities and their background of Commercial Clubs, and placed under Federal surveillance. At the same time some care will have to be taken not to let the local interests of congressmen count for much in the case. Congressmen commonly are held in somewhat intimate bonds of goodwill with the Commercial Clubs of their several districts - or rather they are under the necessity of maintaining relations of mutual confidence with the county committees, which are usually made up out of the same class of persons that make up the Commercial Clubs, and are identified with the same local interests. This need not mean that congressmen are consciously partisan in their guidance of public affairs, but only that they are sufficiently human to take on the colors of their best friends. The personal equation counts for something even in the case of the most profound and dispassionate statesmen.

The local marketing of the main staples is a comparatively simple matter, apart from the "tricks of the trade," the businesslike intrigue injected into it by buyers and commission men each seeking his own pro t. That is to say, the necessary work of handling these staples, as well as the inspection and grading of them, is simple enough so long as it is not complicated by efforts to evade the rules under which it is carried on; and it should accordingly lend itself readily to administrative regulation, provided always that care is taken to remove all undue opportunity for surreptitious gain. The simple and obvious remedy to apply, as an emergency measure, and for the period of the war, is for the Administration to take over the marketing, as it is already taking over the surveillance of standards and inspection. Something has already been done in this way under the powers vested in the Grain Corporation. This would involve only a relatively slight increase in official powers, in the necessary number of officials, and in the amount of work to be done. Most if not all private buyers would drop out or would be drawn into the Administration's service; and in so far there would result an economy of personnel and of work. Some, probably few, of these private buyers could be turned to use in other occupations. The many wholly useless ones among them would be no more useless when so retired from business than they now are in carrying on a business that need not be done; while the greater number of their employees are suitable for farm work and would be set free for that use.

The retail trade, in the ordinary sense, is a larger and more complicated proposition. But even as regards this retail trade the magnitude and complications of the task will be found much less in practical fact than they appear from the outside and before the proposed change takes effect.

Any reasonable measure of control designed to release farm workmen from their town occupations would necessarily do away with much of the work and management involved in the trade as it runs now. The number of retail concerns would fall off, and the volume of traffic would be greatly reduced, even if the quantity of goods handled remained the same. If, in effect, those who continued in the trade were put on a basis of cost plus a narrow margin on turnover, it is also reasonably to be expected that much of the working at cross purposes that now prevails among them would be discontinued. The number of shipments, deliveries, accountings, payments, etc., would decrease, with or without a decrease in the quantity of goods handled.

This retail trade of the country towns is part of the distributive system of the country. The distributive system comprises also a complete assortment of jobbers, who deal with factories and similar sources of supply on the one side, and with the retailers on the other side. All this involves bargaining at every move, a multiplicity of accounts, cross freights, competitive selling, and compromises of various kinds to safeguard and apportion the gains to be got in the trade. There are several times as many of these jobbing houses as are necessary to take care of the traffic, although the duplication probably does not go so far as in the retail trade; at the same time there appears to be going on a slight relative decrease in the number of jobbers, rather than the contrary.

The nature of the traffic that is to be taken care of, and the recent developments in the management of it, indicate plainly enough what will be the nature of the move which is now due to be made. The traffic is of a two-fold character; or rather it is of a two-sided shape. The staple farm products have to be assembled and forwarded to the central markets, for storage awaiting shipment or to be worked over into finished goods in the mills and packing houses and passed out again into the channels of the retail trade. On the other side, goods suitable for use by the farm community have to be assembled in the same central markets and distributed over the same transportation lines to the same places from which the staple farm products come.

In all this traffic the business men - "middlemen" - are occupied with getting a profit out of it, every time the goods are bought and sold. That is what the business men do business for. The greater the number of times that the goods are bought and sold between the farm and the mill or packing house, or between the mill or factory and the farm, the greater the number of business profits to be deducted from the price which the farmer gets for his produce, or to be added to the price which he has to pay for his necessary supplies; and the greater the uncertainty, miscalculation, and retardation to which the whole traffic is liable, between the farm and the factory, and back again.

Any traffic that is conducted by business men and on business principles - principles of purchase and sale-is necessarily subject to uncertainty, miscalculation, and retardation all along the line; and the greater the number of bargains to be made, the greater the liability to uncertainty and retardation. Conversely, any measures that can be taken to reduce the amount of bargaining - that is to say, of business - necessary to be done in marketing farm produce, or in distributing necessary goods to the farm community, should be very much to the purpose just now, when the urgent requirements of the war situation demand that uncertainty and retardation should be reduced to a minimum. In this connection "Business as usual" means "Uncertainty and retardation as usual."

So far as bargaining - that is to say, business - can be eliminated from the handling of farm produce and farm supplies, the whole country stands to gain in point of expedition and efficiency. Therefore, simply as a matter of expedition and economy, for the period of the war, all this traffic in marketing and distribution in the grain states should best be conducted on a no-profits basis, by disinterested agents of the Administration, and regardless of any vested interests on the part of the business men who would be affected by such a move. The exigencies of the war overbear all questions of private profit, for the period of the war; and wherever disregard of private profits will contribute to the effectual prosecution of the war, it will be simply foolish to let vested interests of this kind stand in the way.

It will not be necessary to take any drastic or forcible measures to displace these superfluous business concerns in the retail trade; such as conscription, confiscation, or penalisation of the supernumerary establishments. All that is needed is to arrange for carrying on the necessary work of marketing and distribution on a no-profits basis, or even on a narrow margin. When this is done, the superfluous retailers will presently withdraw, for the period of the war.

Such a retirement of superfluous business concerns in the country towns is the main fact to be aimed at. Doubtless there is more than one way to accomplish that result. What is needed now, and needed urgently, is the speedy choice of some reliable and expeditious method of doing it. It is a question of releasing the superfluous employees of these superfluous business concerns in time for this year's harvest, if possible; and of leaving them free beyond this season, for the period of the war. It is, therefore, necessary to take such measures at the earliest possible date, and to follow them up consistently until there is no more labor being spent on wasteful duplication of work in the country towns.

The plan which is here spoken for is simple, direct, expeditious, and thorough. And it has the defects which go along with those qualities. It proposes to correct an evil state of things by changing the state of things, in the face of those vested interests that live on this evil state of things. It is, therefore, to be expected that the whole matter will be quite distasteful to those superfluous merchants, bankers, etc., who will be constrained to go into temporary retirement or into some useful occupation for the period of the war. All that sort of thing is to be deplored, of course. At the same time it is to be noted that the proposed measures violate no legal rights and add nothing to the cost of living or the burden of taxation; quite the contrary, in fact.

For the period of the war, the proposed plan contemplates a combination of the methods and working forces employed in three different lines of enterprise that have already proved successful - the Parcel Post, the Chain Stores, and the Mail-Order Houses. It is proposed that the Federal

Administration shall, for the period of the war, install a system of farm marketing and of retail distribution of staple merchandise at cost, to be organised as one undivided administrative undertaking under the parcel post division of the U. S. Post Office, and designed to serve all those places and persons whom the parcel post can effectually be made to reach. To this end the Administration will, for the period of the war, take over the traffic of the established mail-order houses, together with so much of their equipment, stocks, and personnel as may be useful for the purpose.

And to do this it will also be necessary to discontinue certain restrictions and add something to the discretionary powers of the Post Office.

These mail-order houses already have the ways and means of this traffic in hand, tested, proved, and running smoothly; and the only serious change necessary to be made in their management of the traffic is to combine it with the parcel-post system in such a way as to eliminate all that expensive, vexatious, and unnecessary accounting that is now involved in the shipment and delivery of goods through the Post Office. Many items of work and expense that now have to be counted in among "overhead charges" in the mail-order business will drop out so soon as it is taken over and consolidated with the parcel post; very much as there is a saving of similar items made whenever several independent business concerns are consolidated under one management in the formation of a trust or pool. In the everyday transaction between the parcel post and the mail-order traffic, as it is now conducted, there is always a volume of unnecessary business to be done: fees to be collected and accounted for, risks and margins to be scrutinised and secured, responsibility to be apportioned, evaded, and enforced - all of which results in unnecessary delay, uncertainty, and expense in the transmission of the goods, at the same time that it increases the cost to the customers. It works out in the same way if the mail-order house arranges for the carriage and delivery through an express company or other agency. Delay, vexation, and hindrance come into play at both ends of the line, with no other net result than superfluous fees, invoices, vouchers, correspondence, commissions, and advanced charges.

Among the local business concerns whose traffic and earnings will be likely to suffer by such a measure, therefore, are the express companies and similar common carriers, whose personnel and equipment it is designed to release for useful work. It will accordingly be necessary to remove all restrictions on the size, weight, and character of parcels admitted to carriage by post - in fact to place all facilities of freight handling and transport indiscriminately at the disposal of this distributing system. The express companies and other concerns doing business as common carriers have a vested interest in all these everyday hindrances and expenses connected with the retail distribution of merchandise, and it may well be that they should, in ordinary times, be entitled to something approaching that degree of consideration which has usually been accorded them on this head; but at the present juncture, for the period of the war, it should seem reasonable to ask them to forgo the usual discrimination made in their favor by the laws governing the parcel post. As is well known, though not commonly spoken of, these restrictions have been laid and maintained with a view to the vested interests of the express companies and other common carriers, whom it has seemed wise to protect from the unrestricted competition of the parcel post. But at the present juncture, and for the period of the war, it should seem that expediency for the prosecution of the war must be allowed to take precedence of any vested interest in wasteful practices and special privileges. So it is of the essence of the plan here proposed to release as much as may be of the equipment and workmen now employed by these concerns in work that can more economically be taken care of by the parcel post; thereby setting free considerable number of workmen, teams, vehicles, and motors that will readily be turned to use in the production and handling of grain and other produce. For the period of the war, it should seem expedient to leave their special privileges in abeyance and retire many of these private business concerns from a traffic that can better be taken care of without them.

It may be noted that, even with the handicap imposed by all this superfluous business that is now involved in the transmission of merchandise, the mail-order business has been doing very well; so well, indeed, that it has, on the one hand, earned the undying hatred of the

Commercial Clubs, Chambers of Commerce, Town Councils, and such-like bodies who take care of the vested interests in the marketing, carrying, and merchandising trade; at the same time that it has, on the other hand, enabled the leading mail-order houses to capitalise their business at something more than ten times the value of their material assets.

As this business is now conducted, the customer depends on printed descriptions and specifications in making his choice of goods, writes out his order, pays the bill with a postal money-order or its equivalent, commonly with the addition of a fee as well as of postage, transmits the requisite papers through the post office to the office to the mail-order house, where the order is then filled in due course, and the goods started on their transit, with such incidents of delay, expense, and subsequent accounting and adjustment as have already been alluded to above. It is here proposed that the local post office act as agent of the central bureau of distribution, through its office employees and its carriers; to take orders and transmit them with the least possible annoyance or delay; to accept payment, and to make any necessary refunds or adjustments; with no unnecessary writing of instruments or transmission of funds, beyond what is comprised in the ordinary routine of accounting between the local office and the Federal Headquarters.

The money transactions involved, therefore, will best be handled somewhat after the fashion of periodical clearings; and these periodical clearings will be greatly simplified, as compared with what now goes on in the country towns, if the local post office will at the same time take over what would naturally fall to it in the way of a banking business for the convenience of its customers. Particularly will there be a gain in simplicity and expedition if the same general management takes over the marketing of farm produce; so that the local post office also become a station for the purchase or receipt of farm produce as well as for the sale and delivery of staple merchandise. In such a case, the local office will carry a two-sided account with the central office, running roughly even in the long run, as between receipts and disbursements, but with a variable balance to be adjusted from time to time. There is also nothing but the vested interest of the local banks to hinder the local office from carrying on its books the accounts of its customers, subject to draft and settlement after the usual manner of a bank's deposit accounts. All of which will give its money transactions still more of the character of "clearings."

So soon as the post's transactions of purchase and sale in its dealings with its local customers, as well as its receipts and disbursements as a whole, come in this way to be offset against one another, it is evident that the greater part of the remittances which now are involved in the marketing of farm produce, on the one hand, and the sale of merchandise through the retail trade, on the other hand, will best be taken care of by clearings and balancing of accounts. Relatively little remittance of funds, or seasonal provision of funds for "moving the crops," will be needed to keep the balance; particularly if the post office arranges to carry the customers' balances, subject to draft. There will accordingly result a notable decrease in the banking operations necessary to be carried on in the towns.

These and other considerations of a similar bearing indicate unequivocally that, in order to get the full benefit of the proposed system, the post office must also be allowed freely to go into so much of the ordinary work of banking as may seem useful for the purpose. So, e.g., if the local post offices served also as local savings and deposit banks, in correspondence with a similarly empowered central, connected if need be with the Federal

Reserve, it is evident that with such an arrangement the whole matter of receipts and disbursements between the parcel post and its customers would be greatly simplified and facilitated; and it is plain that the volume of necessary banking transactions in the local community would be greatly reduced, and that the cost of banking to the customers would also be materially lowered.

There is, in fact, no good reason why the local banks should not come in for the same kind and degree of correction as that which the exigencies of the war and the food supply must presently enforce among the retail merchants. For the prosecution of the war, superfluous banks are no more useful than superfluous buyers and sellers of goods. All the while it is to be kept in mind, of course, that these excessively numerous bankers are very substantial citizens, and that they are an ornament and a comfort to the community in which they live and from which they draw their living.

This living that so comes to the bankers is an exceptionally good and respectable living, as a rule; and it is got by an unobtrusive and equitable apportionment of such an honest livelihood as is to be derived from the custody of the municipal and county funds, and from a run of commercial and country credit that could be taken care of at a side-counter in the post office. Their vested interest in so dividing and carrying on an excessively voluminous banking business is not lightly to be set aside; nor is it here proposed to interfere with their gains or to curtail their numbers, except transiently, as a measure of expediency, for the period of the war. As a matter of local pride, in which one will take comfort in time of peace, the spectacle of ten well-fed bankers at the county seat must always appeal to the sensibilities of any community that can afford to pay for it; it is in fact a striking evidence of the community's ability to pay, and as such it is probably worth its cost, in time of peace. But in time of war, when the nation's fortunes are in the balance, it should seem reasonable that the prestige-value of a superfluity of well-fed bankers must not be allowed to cloud the issue of national efficiency.

For the period of the war, the new plan promises to dispense with something more than one half of the banking that is now carried on in the country towns, and to simplify the remainder to such a point as to make it hard to recognise. The banking of the country towns is, after all, mainly commercial banking, and it is accordingly inflated on the same scale as the commercial business which it serves. And so soon as the greater part of the business transactions in the towns is discontinued, that much of the present need of "banking facilities" will also disappear, for the time being.

## IV

### IV

If one takes note of the experience of the mail-order houses, and so follows out the further logic of the situation, it will necessarily result that this parcel-post system of retail distribution at cost will have to reach back among the jobbers, mills, factories, and packing houses from which the merchandise is drawn. It will be found necessary to enforce standards of quality, purity, cost, and the like, in all the staple lines of merchandise to be dealt in. Even without having taken over or formally standardised any branch of the retail trade as such, the government has already found itself driven to establish and enforce standards and staple specifications in many lines of production; and there are accordingly a considerable body of inspectors and administrative officers already engaged in this work, and these are ready to be drawn on for the same work under the new plan; so that the proposed plan of control and distribution can be put into effect with a relatively slight increase of the staff of administrative officers. The officers would have to be given additional power and discretion, such as would, in effect, put them in the place of those business men who now control the business for their own profit instead of the public service.

It should also be plain in this connection, to any one who is at all acquainted with present conditions in these industries that supply staple goods for the retail trade - e.g., the packing houses and grist mills - that no system of inspection, and no regulation on the basis of inspection, can hope to hold these producers to a bona fide observance of the rules made and provided; unless the system of inspection and regulation goes the length of taking all responsibility and control out of the hands of all persons who are in any way interested in the business. In fact, it is now becoming plain beyond debate that it will not do to allow these great industrial enterprises to be managed by their owners for a profit, even under the most stringent standardisation and inspection. The Administration is continually driven to more and more arbitrary measures. The ways to evade specified requirements in detail are too many, too obscure, and too easy, for any system of inspection and legal remedy to keep up with the ingenuity of the interested parties. Legal remedy by litigation after the fact is the merest foolishness in these premises. There is no stopping short of a thorough revision, such as will afford no chance of gain by plausible evasions.

So that the great industries which turn out staple goods for the market will on this plan, and for the period of the war, have to be taken under administrative control; to be operated with a view to produce staple goods in prearranged quantities; to be supplied at the proper times, and at cost, to the distributive system whose nucleus is the parcel post. But again it is evident that the New Order in the retail trade cannot logically stop at that point.

What comes to mind in speaking of the great industries that have to do with the staple supplies is such things as packing houses, flour and other grain mills, pulp and paper mills, lumber mills, coal mining concerns, oil refineries, farm machinery concerns, and the like. Industrially speaking, all these and their like are "halfway houses," where the materials are worked up in their transit from their source to the final consumer of the goods; and their work is conditioned on the supply of materials and the changing circumstances which affect the supply. In some instances, indeed in an appreciable proportion of cases, these "midway" enterprises have already come to control the channels of supply on which they depend, as well as the channels of distribution for their products. Many of these large business concerns engaged in such "midway" industries, as e.g., the packers, already control the channels of supply for their materials and the distribution of their products through "car routes," "branch houses," etc., so that in industries of their class the whole machinery for assembling the materials, working them over into finished products, and distributing them as merchandise to the consumers is already effectually organised under a central management and is ready to be taken over by the Administration at any time, without disturbance of the regular run of the traffic.

All this is referred to here to note that such control of the channels of supply is sufficiently practicable to have taken effect as an ordinary incident in the conduct of business - it is "a sound business proposition"; and to note, further, that in some certain ones of these "midway" industries, as in the packing houses and the grain mills, the supply of materials is drawn from the same farms to which merchandise is supplied by the retail trade; and that the control of the channels of supply by the packers and millers is a source of sore and widespread distrust and irritation among the farmers. The control appears to be wholly effectual, by all accounts, even in these private hands; and since it is exercised for the benefit of the packers and millers it is felt by the farmers that it is exercised at their cost. All of which may or may not be true in fact; but the distrust is unquestionably present in force, and potent for much evil.

The logic of the case is plain enough. Under a system of administrative control of such industries as the mills and packing houses it is a simple and obvious further step to extend the system of administrative management to include the marketing and transportation of those farm products which make up the raw materials of the mills and packing houses.

So, in following up the lines along which this postal distributing system will logically carry out its control of the retail trade, it appears that the plan will have to comprise not only the wholesale trade, but also the great industries which supply the great staples on the one side, and which take up and work over the staple products of the farms on the other side.

All of which brings the reach of the projected system of handling and distribution at cost back to the country town, for the first as well as for the last link in its chain of operations. It is, in effect, a plan for taking care of the farm products all the way over the circuit from the farm; when the goods leave the farmer's hands at the local market as raw materials; through the process of working them over into staple goods for consumption; and back again through the processes of distribution, until they reach the farmer's hands as wrought goods ready for use.

The Administration already has in hand nearly all the working parts that would go to make up this wide-reaching administrative system, but these working parts will have to be co-ordinated into a balanced system directed from a single center, instead of being left, as now, out of touch and frequently working at cross purposes. And what is lacking to make the system complete can readily be supplied by drawing on the various private concerns that are now engaged in the same kind of work. In fact, all the needed ways and means are ready to hand, both material, equipment, personnel, and corporate organisation; the grand fault of the present working scheme being that it includes more of all these factors, each and several, than there is use for in the work to be done. And the main purpose of the plan here proposed is to release a good part of this supernumerary personnel, at the same time that a saving of equipment and expense is effected by the same move.

Most of the many business transactions now involved in the handling and transmission of products on their way from the farm to the factory would drop out; so would also the like transactions of purchase and sale between the factory and the delivery of the finished goods in the local market; and it is well known that these transactions of purchase and sale are accountable for a very large proportion of the amount by which the retail price of the finished goods exceeds the price of the raw materials - which is sedulously denied by the interested parties.

The market "bureaux," by means of which this plan would take care of the marketing of farm products, would transact very little that could properly be called "business." There would be no bargaining and no salesmanship involved in their work, which would rather be of the nature of traffic management. The prices decided on would be offered quite impersonally, on a basis of standards and tests, as computed in a system of cost accounting.

There need scarcely be any buyers of farm produce, properly speaking, under this arrangement. A "buyer" is of use, as such, only in case there is some unfair advantage to be gained in a bargain. A "buyer's" place and function in the economic system is to "make a good bargain," as it is so called; and in this case there would be no bargain to be made. The Administration, through its local traffic agents connected with the parcel-post distributing system, would make its offer of prices on a cost basis, as adapted by skilled accountants to the special circumstances of each locality; and the producers would "take it or leave it" knowing all the while that the price so made is made without a view to profits and that no man has any motive of gain in determining it. The marketing of such staples as grain and meat under this system would, in fact, not differ greatly from the current practice; and the like is true as regards the marketing of the finished staples through the retail trade; except for the principle underlying the whole traffic. In effect, the present practice is that the large "midway" concerns which gather in, work over, and distribute the produce, as, e.g., the packers, make the price at which the raw materials are bought and at which the finished goods are sold; and the producing farmers, as well as the consumers, are at liberty "to take it or leave it."

But the principle on which the price is made by these "midway" business concerns is the principle of "what the traffic will bear"; that is to say, what will bring the largest net profits to those who so make the price.

Whereas the principle on which prices are to be made, to both sides, under administrative control, is the principle of net cost. It will be for the producing farmers, on the one hand, and the consumers of the finished goods, on the other hand, "to take it or leave it." And the

Administration's part in the management of this system will be so to arrange its schedule of prices as to induce the farming community to turn out the largest practicable output of those staples that are needed for the prosecution of the war.

The details of this price-making cannot be gone into here; neither can the related question of the form of accounts and payments to be adopted under the proposed plan. All that is an extensive matter, into which many other and larger considerations enter. The whole question of finding a practicable base on which to compute the prices of the several staple products, and the ratios or coefficients that should govern the relative prices of these staple farm products, on the one side, and of the staple goods necessary for use by the farm population, on the other side - all that is matter that will have to be worked out as a co-ordinate line of the policy to be pursued in the distribution of the food supply.

It may be in place to say that no administrative pressure is designed to be brought on the local concerns, whether as buyers or sellers, beyond that equitable pressure of competition that is implied in the buying and selling of goods at cost. This pressure would reasonably be expected to induce the greater number of them to quit the trade, whether as buyers or as sellers; but there need be no apprehension that the retail dealers would disappear altogether. Their number would be greatly reduced, perhaps, but some of them would doubtless continue in the trade, to serve the daily minor wants of their customers at least. It is true, the retail buyers would be expected to disappear, or virtually so; and it is not easy to see what place there would be for such concerns as deal in lumber, brick, coal, and similar articles of large bulk and staple grades.

For the convenience of customers, to meet their everyday minor needs and also as a further check on competitive duplication of equipment, this parcel-post distributing system will necessarily comprise a subsidiary system of local branches, of the nature of "general merchandise stores"; which are to be operated on the plan of the "chain stores" now in use, and will carry relatively slight stocks of such commonplace goods as are called for from day to day in small quantity and without notice. The established machinery of the chain stores could advantageously be turned to account; and the existing stocks of the vanishing local retailers would also be expected to go to these branches; which would in the ordinary case most conveniently be housed under the same roof with the post office, and handled in the accustomed way; the substantial difference as contrasted with the present usage being the absence of ordinary profits. These local branches will also be required to handle such local. produce as is distributed to local customers without passing through the central markets.

At the same time they will take over most of the distribution of the meat supply, and of other perishable articles that are handled in the same general way, as, e.g., fruits and bakery goods. The "car routes" of the packing houses, which already cover the territory in a sufficiently thorough fashion, can be turned to use for this purpose, without delay or disturbance; although it may prove desirable to enlarge the existing "car route" scheme somewhat to take care of a somewhat enlarged traffic in perishable goods, such as would follow from this combination of the meat supply with the general trade in perishables of the same class.

So also, the hotels and inns of the country towns are likely to suffer a marked decline under the new plan. They will presumably run on a greatly reduced volume of traffic, if at all. As is well known, the greater part of their custom is now made up of traveling salesmen and other persons who have to do with the retail trade.

Their local custom is also made -up of persons occupied with the same retail trade, in one way or another. Should this retail trade fall off, e.g., by some three fourths or so, the effect on the hotel trade should not be hard to imagine; and as a matter of economy the effect should presumably be altogether salutary. Notoriously, these country-town hotels are extremely wasteful, not only in the use of foodstuffs but in all articles of consumption with which they have to do. So that any reduction of their trade by this means is to be counted on not only to set free a certain labor force now employed in unnecessary work, but it should also result in a very substantial economy in the daily consumption. The hotels are doubtless the most wasteful users of foodstuffs in the country towns.

For the period of the war, such a plan of economy and expedition in the retail trade will also have a substantial effect on the ordinary country town, as an "urban community." These towns live on the retail trade, directly or indirectly; and in so far as the retail trade suffers a reduction in the amount of work which it now involves or in the number of persons which it now employs, it is fairly to be expected that such of the town's population as are not immediately engage n the trade will also fall off in the same proportion. just what this proportion might be would not be easy to say; but it may perhaps be reasonable to expect that the town population at large would decline, for the time being, by something like one half, or two thirds. This reduction of the town population, even if it is only transient, will doubtless bear heavily on the local pride of the town-dwellers; which is to be deplored, but which, it is also fair to expect, will be borne with becoming fortitude in view of the nation's need of diverting all of the available working population to useful work. It is, indeed, not beyond reason to expect that the number of idle inhabitants, rich and poor, may decline by some nine tenths or so. Much of the ground space and buildings may likewise be expected to fall idle, and be turned to more economical use, for the time being; with the result that the local real estate values may be expected, transiently, to decline in a serious fashion; which would be deplored even more loudly.

All this disturbance of the even course of life in the country towns - the retail trade, the real-estate exchange, the hotel traffic, the Commercial

Club, and the city council - all this disturbance will seem a grievous burden to those persons whose pleasure or profit is lessened by it; but it is, of course, to be counted as a transient derangement only - as a passing interruption of that régime of wasteful duplication, unearned incomes, and collusive division of profits that now goes to make up the everyday life and habitual interests of the town's population. It is, of course, designed to take effect only for the period of the war, and only as a measure of expedient war-time economy; and it is fairly to be expected that the superfluous townsmen will put up with it all in a cheerful spirit of patriotic sacrifice for the common good; always with a confident view to a speedy return to conditions that will again enable an excessive number of them to turn an excessive number of honest pennies at the cost of their country neighbors - more or less honest.
