# Sabotage

### SABOTAGE

Sabotage is one of the late and formidable loan-words of the English language. At the same time it has also some currency in other languages, as would be expected in the case of a loan-word which fills so notable a place in common speech, since the facts which call for the use of such a new word are sure to range beyond the frontiers of any one language. In all this the word has the company of such other late comers as "camouflage" and "bolshevism." And not much different is the case of such late-come, home-bred terms as "graft" and "goodwill," and "intangible assets" and "vested interests." Whether they are borrowed from abroad or are made over from innocent home-grown words, all these half- technical terms that are making their way into common use to describe notable facts lack that sharp definition that belongs to words of the ancient line. There is always something of metaphor or analogy about them, and the meaning attached to their use in common speech is neither precise nor uniform. They are still more or less unfamiliar; they seem uncouth and alien, but they make good their intrusion into the language by becoming indispensable. They are needed for present use to describe facts which are very much in evidence and which are not otherwise provided for.

Of course, the facts described by such late word-growths as "graft," "sabotage," "camouflage," or "bolshevism" are not altogether new, nor nearly so; but they count for more now than they have done in the past, and so it has become necessary to find words for them. As a fact of history, graft is at least as old as the early Egyptian dynasties, and sabotage is quite inseparable from the price system, so that its beginnings can scarcely fail to be as ancient as the love of money. It is perhaps the first-born of those evils that have been said to be rooted in the love of money. Doubtless graft and sabotage have been running along together through human history from its beginning. We should all find it very difficult to get our bearings in any period of history or any state of society which might by any chance not be shot through with both. Still those ancients who passed before the last quarter of the nineteenth century had not the use of these technical terms to describe the facts, with which they seem all the while to have been familiar enough. It may have been because the facts of graft and sabotage, however massive and wide-reaching they doubtless were in those past times, did not, after all, then stand out in such bold relief on the face of things. But things have moved forward since then. And quite plainly now, since the price system and all its ways, means, and ends have reached that mature development which is familiar to this generation, both of these terms have become indispensable in common and current speech.
