# Congressional Sabotage

### CONGRESSIONAL SABOTAGE

In congress. the practice of sabotage has long enjoyed another imported and figurative name, also drawn from footgear "filibuster," the onomatopoetic equivalent of "freebooter." Respectable as familiarity has made this political device, it is by intent and effect sheer sabotage. Witness the present plight of the Railroad Administration and other bureaus, deprived of their necessary and in most cases unopposed appropriations because the late Congress, in order to force an extra session in which to protect its constitutional function in foreign affairs, deliberately refused to perform its domestic functions and adjourned without providing funds to keep the governmental machine running during its absence. With a touching solicitude the Congressmen provided for the salaries of their secretaries, but they made no provision for their wage-workers in the lobbies of the two chambers. And while they take the spring air in cities whose street-cleaning departments do not depend upon federal appropriation, the government clerks they have left behind in Washington walk to work that is, in many cases, temporarily unpaid, through streets that are unswept because Congress went on strike. Nobody believes, of course, that the governmental machine will stop for lack of the withheld fuel; and in most departments the results of the Congressional strike will be more ludicrous than .important. One bureau however has been throttled in its hour of utmost need. The Federal Employment Service suddenly finds itself with funds to operate less than sixty of its seven hundred placement agencies, and must appeal, to states and municipalities to keep open as many of these offices as possible. Its personnel, recently assembled at great pains, is again scattered, and its training school closed. Meanwhile demobilization continues and unemployment mounts. At best we have taken too little interest in finding jobs for our war workers and returned soldiers.

And congressional tactics that slow down our all too inadequate machinery for returning these hands to productive industry is really no matter at whom it is directed nor how it is dignified in parliamentary parlance straight sabotage on business, on labor, and on the people at large, the form of sabotage known as striking on the job.
