# The Red Terror - At Last It Has Come to America

### THE RED TERROR - AT LAST IT HAS COME TO AMERICA

In view of the unexampled inquisitorial raids set afoot or connived at by panic- stricken officials, and in view of the consequent increasing insecurity of person and property, it should be worth while to take stock of the situation and cast up an account of these disquieting circumstances that are driving the Guardians of the Vested Interests to distraction and frightening the Administration into a muddle of unreasoned violence and subterfuge. Notoriously, an uneasy situation has arisen out of the war, and more immediately out of the highly remarkable Peace in which the war has been brought to a provisional close. There is much at stake in the way of vested rights, and the state of things is precarious enough. These disquieting circumstances which go to make up this uneasy situation all converge to the general upshot that Bolshevism is a menace to the Vested Interests of privilege and property. The dread reality of this menace to the Vested Interests is not to be denied or made light of. The Vested Interests are doubtless riding for a fall. But there is also nothing to be gained by over-statement and extravagant alarm. Hysteria is neither comfortable nor convincing.

The guardians of the Vested Interests in America are doubtless wise in taking all reasonable precautions; they are presumably right in their evident belief that the continued rule of these Vested Interests is no longer so secure as they would like; but the Guardians would doubtless be still wiser to confine their efforts to reasonable precautions instead of screaming Wolf! Wolf! when there is no wolf in sight. But it is not easy to keep an even temper when the blessed beatitudes of special privilege are in a way to be compromised. The Guardians of these blessed beatitudes have been swept off their footing by the discovery that a division is beginning to run between the Vested Interests and the underlying population, and that the Vested Interests are presumably the weaker of the two parties. No one is to blame for this rapidly maturing division of the community into the kept classes on the one side and the underlying population from whom their keep is drawn on the other side. Nor should it surprise or alarm anyone who is at all informed, or willing to be informed, as to the run of facts in the world of business and industry the past few years. It is all an outcome of the dispassionate sweep of forces which no man can withstand or deflect. Only the Guardians of the kept classes have been unable to see the matter in that light, because it is the whole duty of these Guardians of the Old Order to endeavor by all means, fair or foul, to deflect the sweep of events over which they have no control. Such a change of base as is now coming in sight is in the nature of a moral impossibility for the keepers of the Old Order.

Meantime the experience of the war and after has brought the Guardians to realize that the continued rule of these Vested Interests of privilege and property runs at cross-purposes with the material welfare of the underlying population, and to realize also that the underlying population is beginning to be aware of the same fact. But the Guardians fail to realize that a very stubborn and massive fabric of settled use and wont surrounds and supports these vested rights of privilege and property, and that the American population is very stolid and submissive in everything that concerns its inbred prejudices. It is known and is beginning to be notorious that the Vested Interests of business are driven by business considerations to waste, mismanage, and obstruct the country's productive industry, unavoidably and unremittingly, and to divert an ever-increasing share of the country's income to their own profit; and the Guardians are no longer able to avoid all knowledge of this notorious state of things; and they have let these known facts drive them to the hasty conclusion that so soon as the population at large come to know the same facts and to take stock of them, there must immediately follow a headlong popular revolt and a sweeping disallowance of all these obstructive vested rights of privilege and property. The Guardians of the Vested Interests are presumably right in believing that the existing state of things in business and industry should logically lead to revolt and dispossession so soon as the facts of the case are known; but they overlook the main consideration, that any effectual movement of overturn will have to proceed not on grounds of logic, but on grounds of sentiment and the strategic disposal of forces. Hence their excessive alarm.

Popular sentiment, as well as the strategic disposal of forces, is still securely to be counted on to uphold the established order of vested rights and Business as Usual. The Guardians have allowed the known facts of the case to unseat their common sense. Hence the pitiful spectacle of official hysteria and the bedlamite conspiracies in restraint of sobriety.
