# The Red Terror and the Vested Interests

### THE RED TERROR AND THE VESTED INTERESTS

It is running wild among the guardians of Business as Usual; official, semi- official, and quasi-official; courts, camps, and churches; legislative, judiciary, and executive. It is true, the common run of American humanity continue to be singularly immune and apathetic, but the Terror is already consuming the tissues of many substantial citizens in a shockingly public manner. The Guardians of the Vested Interests are panic-stricken, all and several, certified and subsidiary and surreptitious. The commercialized newspapers all see Red. So do the official and quasi-official conspiracies, such as the Lusk Commission, the Union League Club, the Security League, and the Civic Federation, as well as the Publicity Police, the Workday Politicians, the Clerics of the Philistine Confession, and the Wild Asses of the Devil generally.

Driven by their own Red fancy, these many Guardians have been banding together to molest such of their neighbors as do not see Red; and with the aid or connivance of panic-stricken officials, the conspirators have been going in for inquisitorial raids, to find evidence of undue sanity - among the sober population. All persons who refuse to be stampeded by the Red alarm are open to suspicion unless they are visibly identified with the Vested Interests and any person who falls under the suspicion of the official and quasi-official alarmists is, in effect, assumed to be guilty of sedition. Acute paranoia persecutoria is coming to be rated the chief of the civic virtues.

Already the confederated paranoiacs have assembled much curious evidence of undue sanity among the vulgar. An extract from an exhibit of such evidence a letter presumed to show seditiously excessive sanity is here reproduced: ... the thing that seems to excite the Chester authorities mainly is that the second speaker at the meeting ... advocated the pardon of all political prisoners, including Eugene Debs. The District Attorney said that Mr. Debs was a "stinking, flea-bitten, rotten skunk." ... I asked him what the possible charge [against the defendants] could be and he said that they would try to hold them [64 men] for treason against the state. They seem to have a law in Philadelphia establishing a state treason against the commonwealth of Pennsylvania. He looked up the law in my presence and read it and then agreed with me that the law would not apply. Then he said that the next thing they could hold them for would be the section of inciting to riot. But it developed that that constituted only misdemeanor and that the utmost could be a fine not exceeding $100. I asked him whether he thought $5,000 was the right sort of bail. He said that the g---- d-- -- Poles and Russians had money to burn. ... Before I left Chester he told me that he thought that ... any lawyer who would act for these men would be a disgrace in the community. ... I told him that the information [in regard to the legal fee] had been sent in by a Quaker and then I struck the wrong key. He then called the Quakers all kinds of names, the main adjective being "stinking."

Another letter reporting the hearings of this case says:

The attorney from Philadelphia who acted as local counsel challenged the Judge to point to one decision in the courts of Pennsylvania under which the defendants could be held, whereupon the Judge sarcastically remarked, "I am much afraid that your industry has not been rewarded. If you will only look into a case decided in the year 1787, about the time when the Constitution was to be adopted, you will find a precedent under which I can hold these defendants."

This case, it developed, was the famous liberty pole case. The Judge said that at the time of the adoption of the Constitution "there were some misguided individuals who under the leadership of Thomas Jefferson protested against the Constitution because it gave the federal government too much power." But the Judge mentioned that the fact that the Constitution was afterwards adopted showed that these individuals were wrong and mistaken. During the protest raised by "these so-called "misled individuals" they erected what was known then as liberty poles ... A man was arrested for being present at the erection of such a liberty pole, although he did not take part in it, and he was convicted by the local court in Philadelphia; the Judge finished, "and that is the law in this state and it is a good law and I am going to hold these defendants for unlawful assembly under five thousand dollars bail for action of grand jury."

It is alleged by the terrorized Guardians that the letters which are here quoted go to show that certain persons have interested themselves in procuring counsel for certain impecunious workmen of foreign extraction who were to have been convicted out of hand on a footless charge of rioting; all of which is taken as presumptive evidence of a seditious degree of sobriety. These particular exhibits may perhaps lay bare the Red state of mind of the Guardians in a more picturesque fashion than the common run of these uncanny keepsakes of the demented which they have been assembling in the course of these raids; but incredibly foolish as this particular episode is, it is after all no more than a fair indication of the pitch to which official hysteria has already risen. The volume of evidence of this character assembled by the Red alarmists is already fantastically large; and they are busily accumulating more of the same kind, by fair means and foul.
